md-docs/ready/training/06-adding-security.md, before:

---
id: adding-security
title: Adding Security
permalink: ready/training/develop/adding-security/index.html
---

In this lesson you’ll learn how to add security to your Couchbase Mobile application. You’ll implement authentication and define access control, data validation, and access grant policies.

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="ios" />

#### Requirements

- Xcode 8 (Swift 3)

#### Getting Started

Download the project below.

<block class="net" />

#### Requirements

- Visual Studio 2015+ (Windows) or Xamarin Studio 6+ (OS X)

#### Getting Started

- Clone this repo and open the `dotnet\Training.sln` project
- (optional) Update to the latest version of the Couchbase.Lite / Couchbase.Lite.Storage.SQLCipher nuget package, if not already added

<block class="ios" />

<div class="buttons-unit downloads">
  <a href="https://cl.ly/2A2D3q3R2d1g/xcode-project.zip" class="button" id="project">
    <img src="img/download-xcode.png">
  </a>
</div>

Unzip the file and install the dependencies using Cocoapods.

```bash
$ cd xcode-project
$ pod install
```

Open **Todo.xcodeproj** in Xcode. Then build & run the project.

<img src="img/image42.png" class="center-image" />

Throughout this lesson, you will navigate in different files of the Xcode project. We recommend to use the method navigator to scroll to a method.

<img src="https://cl.ly/0G263m3m1a0w/image44.gif" class="center-image" />

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="all" />

## User Authentication

### Install Sync Gateway

Users are created with a name/password on Sync Gateway which can then be used on the Couchbase Lite replicator to authenticate as a given user. You can create users by hardcoding the user's name/password in the configuration file. Create a new file called **sync-gateway-config.json** with the following.

```javascript
{
  "log": ["HTTP", "Auth"],
  "databases": {
    "todo": {
      "server": "walrus:",
      "users": {
        "user1": {"password": "pass"},
        "user2": {"password": "pass"}
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Try it out

1. [Download Sync Gateway](http://www.couchbase.com/nosql-databases/downloads#couchbase-mobile)
2. Unzip the file and locate the executable at **~/Downloads/couchbase-sync-gateway/bin/sync_gateway**.
3. Start it from the command-line with the config file.

    ```bash
    $ /path/to/sync_gateway sync-gateway-config.json
    ```

4. Two users are now visible at [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/users](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/users).

### Replications with Authentication

With Sync Gateway users defined you can now enable authentication on the Couchbase Lite replicator. The code below creates two replications with authentication.

<block class="ios" />

```swift
// This code can be found in AppDelegate.swift
// in the startReplication(withUsername:andPassword:) method
pusher = database.createPushReplication(kSyncGatewayUrl)
pusher.continuous = true
NotificationCenter.default.addObserver(self, selector: #selector(replicationProgress(notification:)),
    name: NSNotification.Name.cblReplicationChange, object: pusher)

puller = database.createPullReplication(kSyncGatewayUrl)
puller.continuous = true
NotificationCenter.default.addObserver(self, selector: #selector(replicationProgress(notification:)),
                                        name: NSNotification.Name.cblReplicationChange, object: puller)

if kLoginFlowEnabled {
    let authenticator = CBLAuthenticator.basicAuthenticator(withName: username, password: password!)
    pusher.authenticator = authenticator
    puller.authenticator = authenticator
}

pusher.start()
puller.start()
```

<block class="net" />

```c#
// This code can be found in CoreApp.cs
// in the StartReplication(string, string) method
var authenticator = default(IAuthenticator);
if(username != null && password != null) {
    authenticator = AuthenticatorFactory.CreateBasicAuthenticator(username, password);
}

var db = AppWideManager.GetDatabase(username);
var pusher = db.CreatePushReplication(SyncGatewayUrl);
pusher.Continuous = true;
pusher.Authenticator = authenticator;


var puller = db.CreatePullReplication(SyncGatewayUrl);
puller.Continuous = true;
puller.Authenticator = authenticator;

pusher.Start();
puller.Start();

_pusher = pusher;
_puller = puller;
```

<block class="all" />

The `CBLAuthenticator` class has static methods for each authentication method supported by Couchbase Lite. Here, you're passing the name/password to the `basicAuthenticatorWithName` method. The object returned by this method can be set on the replication's `authenticator` property.

#### Try it out

<block class="ios" />

1. Set `kLoginFlowEnabled` to `true` in **AppDelegate.swift**.

    ```swift
    let kLoginFlowEnabled = true
    ```

2. Build and run.

3. Now login with the credentials saved in the config file previously (**user1/pass**) and create a new list. Open the Sync Gateway Admin UI at [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo), the list document is successfully replicated to Sync Gateway as an authenticated user.

    ![](img/image35.png)

> **Note:** You can remove the local database and check if the pull replication retrieves the documents now present on Sync Gateway. On macOS, use the [SimPholders](https://simpholders.com/) utility app to quickly find the data directory of the application and delete the database called **user1**. Then restart the app and you'll notice that the "Today" list isn't displayed. That is, the list document wasn't replicated from Sync Gateway to Couchbase Lite. Indeed, the document is not routed to a channel that the user has access to. **Channel** and **access** are new terms so don't worry, we'll cover what they mean in the next section.
<video src="https://d3vv6lp55qjaqc.cloudfront.net/items/1s1G3C1i2a0G2P3o0G0m/movie1.mp4" controls="true" poster="https://cl.ly/1W2T3w463S0f/image72.png"></video>

<block class="net" />

1. Change `LoginEnabled = false` to `LoginEnabled = true` in the `CreateHint()` method in **CoreApp.cs**

    ```c#
    var retVal = new CoreAppStartHint {
        LoginEnabled = true, // Line to change is here
        EncryptionEnabled = false,
        SyncEnabled = false,
        UsePrebuiltDB = false,
        ConflictResolution = false,
        Username = "todo"
    };

    return retVal;
    ```
    
2. Build and run

3. Now login with the credentials saved in the config file previously (**user1/pass**) and create a new list. Open the Sync Gateway Admin UI at [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo), the list document is successfully replicated to Sync Gateway as an authenticated user.

<block class="wpf" />

> **Note:** You can remove the local database and check if the pull replication retrieves the documents now present on Sync Gateway. Using File Explorer, type `%LOCALAPPDATA%` into the location bar and press enter, then delete the database **user1.cblite2**. Then restart the app and you'll notice that the "Today" list isn't displayed. That is, the list document wasn't replicated from Sync Gateway to Couchbase Lite. Indeed, the document is not routed to a channel that the user has access to. **Channel** and **access** are new terms so don't worry, we'll cover what they mean in the next section.

<block class="xam" />

> **Note:** You can remove the local database and check if the pull replication retrieves the documents now present on Sync Gateway. On macOS, use the [SimPholders](https://simpholders.com/) utility app to quickly find the data directory of the application and delete the database called **user1** on iOS, or you can use the adb shell to navigate to the application's data folder and delete it on Android. Then restart the app and you'll notice that the "Today" list isn't displayed. That is, the list document wasn't replicated from Sync Gateway to Couchbase Lite. Indeed, the document is not routed to a channel that the user has access to. **Channel** and **access** are new terms so don't worry, we'll cover what they mean in the next section.

<block class="all" />

## Access Control

In order to give different users access to different documents, you must write a sync function. The sync function lives in the configuration file of Sync Gateway. It’s a JavaScript function and every time a new document, revision or deletion is added to a database, the sync function is called and given a chance to examine the document.

In the sync function, you can use different API methods to route documents to channels, grant users access to channels and even assign roles to users. Access rules generally follow the order shown on the image below: write permissions, validation, routing, read permissions.

![](img/image15.png)

> **Tip:** Open the [Access Control](/documentation/mobile/current/training/design/security/index.html) lesson in a new tab, it will be useful throughout this section.



### Document Types

The Sync Function takes two arguments:

- **doc:** The current revision being processed.
- **oldDoc:** The parent revisions if it's an update operation and `null` if it's a create operation.

Each model type will have different access control rules associated with it. So the first operation is to ensure the document has a type property. Additionally, once a document is created, its type cannot change. The code below implements those 2 validation rules.

```javascript
function(doc, oldDoc){
  /* Validate */
  if (isCreate()) {
    // Don't allow creating a document without a type.
    validateNotEmpty("type", doc.type);
  } else if (isUpdate()) {
    // Don't allow changing the type of any document.
    validateReadOnly("type", doc.type, oldDoc.type);
  }

  function isCreate() {
    return ((oldDoc == null || oldDoc._deleted) && doc._deleted != true);
  }

  function isUpdate() {
    return (!isCreate(oldDoc) && !isDelete(doc));
  }

  function validateReadOnly(name, value, oldValue) {
    if (value != oldValue) {
      throw({forbidden: name + " is read-only."});
    }
  }
}
```

As shown above, you can define inner functions to encapsulate logic used throughout the sync function. This makes your code more readable and follows the DRY principle (Don't Repeat Yourself).

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the code snippet above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the updated sync function.

    > **Note:** It won't update the config file on your filesystem, make sure to copy/paste from the Admin UI to the config once you are happy with your changes.

3. Add two documents through the REST API. One with the `type` property and the second document without it. Notice that the user credentials (**user1/pass**) are passed in the URL.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_bulk_docs' \
          -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
          -d '{"docs": [{"type": "task-list", "name": "Groceries"}, {"names": "Today"}]}'

    [
      {"id":"e498cad0380e30a86ed5572140c94831","rev":"1-e4ac377fc9bd3345ddf5892b509c4d79"},
      {"error":"forbidden","reason":"type property missing","status":403}
    ]
    ```

    The document without a type is rejected with an error message: "type property missing".

### Write Permissions

Once you know the type of a document, the next step is to check the write permissions.

The following code ensures the user creating the list document matches with the `owner` property. If not then it checks if the user is a moderator.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    /* Control Write Access */
    var owner = doc._deleted ? oldDoc.owner : doc.owner;
    try {
      // Users can create/update lists for themselves.
      requireUser(owner);
    } catch (e) {
      // Moderators can create/update lists for other users.
      requireRole("moderator");
    }
  }

  function getType() {
    return (isDelete() ? oldDoc.type : doc.type);
  }

  function isDelete() {
    return (doc._deleted == true);
  }
  ...
}
```

When a document is deleted the user properties are removed and the `_deleted: true` property is added as metadata. In this case, the sync function must retrieve the deletion revision type from oldDoc. In the code above, the `getType` inner function encapsulates this logic.

Similarly, the owner field is taken from oldDoc if doc is a deletion revision. The **requireUser** and **requireRole** functions are functionalities built in Sync Gateway.

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
1. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
2. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the updated sync function.
3. Add two documents through the REST API. The request is sent as a moderator user (**user1/pass**). One document is a list for user1 and another is a list for user2.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_bulk_docs' \
          -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
          -d '{"docs": [{"type": "task-list", "owner": "user1"}, {"type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}]}'
          
    [
      {"id":"49c9d5cbbc1cfa05d253f4847d02b8a0","rev":"1-477f7c4f36a31ce9e86a5f465b168b8a"},
      {"error":"forbidden","reason":"missing role","status":403}
    ]
    ```

  Both documents are successfully persisted because the user sending the request has the moderator role.

### Validating Changes

After write permissions, you must ensure the document has the expected schema. There are different types of validation such as checking for the presence of a field or enforcing read-only permission on parts of a document. The code below performs various schema validation operations.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    ...
    /* Validate */
    if (!isDelete()) {
        // Validate required fields.
        validateNotEmpty("name", doc.name);
        validateNotEmpty("owner", doc.owner);

        if (isCreate()) {
          // Validate that the _id is prefixed by owner.
          // validatePrefix("_id", doc._id, "owner", doc.owner + ".");
        } else {
          // Don’t allow task-list ownership to be changed.
          validateReadOnly("owner", doc.owner, oldDoc.owner);
        }
    }
    ...
  }

  function validateNotEmpty(key, value) {
    if (!value) {
      throw({forbidden: key + " is not provided."});
    }
  }

  function validateReadOnly(name, value, oldValue) {
    if (value != oldValue) {
      throw({forbidden: name + " is read-only."});
    }
  }
  ...
}
```

`validateNotEmpty` and `validateReadOnly` are inner functions to encapsulate common validation operations.

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the updated sync function.
4. Send documents with incorrect schemas to make sure the validation works as expected.

### Routing

Once you have determined that the schema is valid you can route the document to channels. A channel is a namespace for documents specifically designed for access control. The code below routes the document to its own list channel.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    ...
    /* Route */
    // Add doc to task-list's channel.
    channel("task-list." + doc._id);
    channel("moderators");
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the upated sync function.
4. 

Both documents are saved and mapped to the corresponding channels in the Admin UI. The video below shows you how to navigate through the different channels.

[//]: # "TODO: Link to video."
<video src="https://cl.ly/3i2w062z1w1F/movie2.mp4" controls="true"></video>

### Read Access

The last step in writing access control rules for a document type is to allow read access to channels. The following code grants the owner and users that are moderators access to the list's channel.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    ...
    /* Grant Read Access */
    // Grant task-list owner access to the task-list, its tasks, and its users.
    access(doc.owner, "task-list." + doc._id);
    access(doc.owner, "task-list." + doc._id + ".users");
    access("role:moderator", "task-list." + doc._id);
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Live Preview Mode** button. This mode doesn't restart Sync Gateway but will use the updated Sync Function for testing purposes. Click the **random** button to pick a document at random and run it through the sync function again. It re-calculates the routing to channels and access grants. This time, the owner (user1) and moderator (user2) both access to the list's channel.

    ![](img/image38.png)

## Conclusion

Well done! You've completed this lesson on adding authentication, writing a sync function and adding database encryption. Feel free to share your feedback, findings or ask any questions on the forums.

Commit message:

Add link to curl download for Windows

md-docs/ready/training/06-adding-security.md, after:

---
id: adding-security
title: Adding Security
permalink: ready/training/develop/adding-security/index.html
---

In this lesson you’ll learn how to add security to your Couchbase Mobile application. You’ll implement authentication and define access control, data validation, and access grant policies.

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="ios" />

#### Requirements

- Xcode 8 (Swift 3)

#### Getting Started

Download the project below.

<block class="net" />

#### Requirements

- Visual Studio 2015+ (Windows) or Xamarin Studio 6+ (OS X)

#### Getting Started

- Clone this repo and open the `dotnet\Training.sln` project
- (optional) Update to the latest version of the Couchbase.Lite / Couchbase.Lite.Storage.SQLCipher nuget package, if not already added

<block class="ios" />

<div class="buttons-unit downloads">
  <a href="https://cl.ly/2A2D3q3R2d1g/xcode-project.zip" class="button" id="project">
    <img src="img/download-xcode.png">
  </a>
</div>

Unzip the file and install the dependencies using Cocoapods.

```bash
$ cd xcode-project
$ pod install
```

Open **Todo.xcodeproj** in Xcode. Then build & run the project.

<img src="img/image42.png" class="center-image" />

Throughout this lesson, you will navigate in different files of the Xcode project. We recommend to use the method navigator to scroll to a method.

<img src="https://cl.ly/0G263m3m1a0w/image44.gif" class="center-image" />

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="all" />

## User Authentication

### Install Sync Gateway

Users are created with a name/password on Sync Gateway which can then be used on the Couchbase Lite replicator to authenticate as a given user. You can create users by hardcoding the user's name/password in the configuration file. Create a new file called **sync-gateway-config.json** with the following.

```javascript
{
  "log": ["HTTP", "Auth"],
  "databases": {
    "todo": {
      "server": "walrus:",
      "users": {
        "user1": {"password": "pass"},
        "user2": {"password": "pass"}
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Try it out

1. [Download Sync Gateway](http://www.couchbase.com/nosql-databases/downloads#couchbase-mobile)
2. Unzip the file and locate the executable at **~/Downloads/couchbase-sync-gateway/bin/sync_gateway**.
3. Start it from the command-line with the config file.

    ```bash
    $ /path/to/sync_gateway sync-gateway-config.json
    ```

4. Two users are now visible at [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/users](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/users).

### Replications with Authentication

With Sync Gateway users defined you can now enable authentication on the Couchbase Lite replicator. The code below creates two replications with authentication.

<block class="ios" />

```swift
// This code can be found in AppDelegate.swift
// in the startReplication(withUsername:andPassword:) method
pusher = database.createPushReplication(kSyncGatewayUrl)
pusher.continuous = true
NotificationCenter.default.addObserver(self, selector: #selector(replicationProgress(notification:)),
    name: NSNotification.Name.cblReplicationChange, object: pusher)

puller = database.createPullReplication(kSyncGatewayUrl)
puller.continuous = true
NotificationCenter.default.addObserver(self, selector: #selector(replicationProgress(notification:)),
                                        name: NSNotification.Name.cblReplicationChange, object: puller)

if kLoginFlowEnabled {
    let authenticator = CBLAuthenticator.basicAuthenticator(withName: username, password: password!)
    pusher.authenticator = authenticator
    puller.authenticator = authenticator
}

pusher.start()
puller.start()
```

<block class="net" />

```c#
// This code can be found in CoreApp.cs
// in the StartReplication(string, string) method
var authenticator = default(IAuthenticator);
if(username != null && password != null) {
    authenticator = AuthenticatorFactory.CreateBasicAuthenticator(username, password);
}

var db = AppWideManager.GetDatabase(username);
var pusher = db.CreatePushReplication(SyncGatewayUrl);
pusher.Continuous = true;
pusher.Authenticator = authenticator;


var puller = db.CreatePullReplication(SyncGatewayUrl);
puller.Continuous = true;
puller.Authenticator = authenticator;

pusher.Start();
puller.Start();

_pusher = pusher;
_puller = puller;
```

<block class="all" />

The `CBLAuthenticator` class has static methods for each authentication method supported by Couchbase Lite. Here, you're passing the name/password to the `basicAuthenticatorWithName` method. The object returned by this method can be set on the replication's `authenticator` property.

#### Try it out

<block class="ios" />

1. Set `kLoginFlowEnabled` to `true` in **AppDelegate.swift**.

    ```swift
    let kLoginFlowEnabled = true
    ```

2. Build and run.

3. Now login with the credentials saved in the config file previously (**user1/pass**) and create a new list. Open the Sync Gateway Admin UI at [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo), the list document is successfully replicated to Sync Gateway as an authenticated user.

    ![](img/image35.png)

> **Note:** You can remove the local database and check if the pull replication retrieves the documents now present on Sync Gateway. On macOS, use the [SimPholders](https://simpholders.com/) utility app to quickly find the data directory of the application and delete the database called **user1**. Then restart the app and you'll notice that the "Today" list isn't displayed. That is, the list document wasn't replicated from Sync Gateway to Couchbase Lite. Indeed, the document is not routed to a channel that the user has access to. **Channel** and **access** are new terms so don't worry, we'll cover what they mean in the next section.
<video src="https://d3vv6lp55qjaqc.cloudfront.net/items/1s1G3C1i2a0G2P3o0G0m/movie1.mp4" controls="true" poster="https://cl.ly/1W2T3w463S0f/image72.png"></video>

<block class="net" />

1. Change `LoginEnabled = false` to `LoginEnabled = true` in the `CreateHint()` method in **CoreApp.cs**

    ```c#
    var retVal = new CoreAppStartHint {
        LoginEnabled = true, // Line to change is here
        EncryptionEnabled = false,
        SyncEnabled = false,
        UsePrebuiltDB = false,
        ConflictResolution = false,
        Username = "todo"
    };

    return retVal;
    ```
    
2. Build and run

3. Now login with the credentials saved in the config file previously (**user1/pass**) and create a new list. Open the Sync Gateway Admin UI at [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo), the list document is successfully replicated to Sync Gateway as an authenticated user.

<block class="wpf" />

> **Note:** You can remove the local database and check if the pull replication retrieves the documents now present on Sync Gateway. Using File Explorer, type `%LOCALAPPDATA%` into the location bar and press enter, then delete the database **user1.cblite2**. Then restart the app and you'll notice that the "Today" list isn't displayed. That is, the list document wasn't replicated from Sync Gateway to Couchbase Lite. Indeed, the document is not routed to a channel that the user has access to. **Channel** and **access** are new terms so don't worry, we'll cover what they mean in the next section.

<block class="xam" />

> **Note:** You can remove the local database and check if the pull replication retrieves the documents now present on Sync Gateway. On macOS, use the [SimPholders](https://simpholders.com/) utility app to quickly find the data directory of the application and delete the database called **user1** on iOS, or you can use the adb shell to navigate to the application's data folder and delete it on Android. Then restart the app and you'll notice that the "Today" list isn't displayed. That is, the list document wasn't replicated from Sync Gateway to Couchbase Lite. Indeed, the document is not routed to a channel that the user has access to. **Channel** and **access** are new terms so don't worry, we'll cover what they mean in the next section.

<block class="all" />

## Access Control

In order to give different users access to different documents, you must write a sync function. The sync function lives in the configuration file of Sync Gateway. It’s a JavaScript function and every time a new document, revision or deletion is added to a database, the sync function is called and given a chance to examine the document.

In the sync function, you can use different API methods to route documents to channels, grant users access to channels and even assign roles to users. Access rules generally follow the order shown on the image below: write permissions, validation, routing, read permissions.

![](img/image15.png)

> **Tip:** Open the [Access Control](/documentation/mobile/current/training/design/security/index.html) lesson in a new tab, it will be useful throughout this section.



### Document Types

The Sync Function takes two arguments:

- **doc:** The current revision being processed.
- **oldDoc:** The parent revisions if it's an update operation and `null` if it's a create operation.

Each model type will have different access control rules associated with it. So the first operation is to ensure the document has a type property. Additionally, once a document is created, its type cannot change. The code below implements those 2 validation rules.

```javascript
function(doc, oldDoc){
  /* Validate */
  if (isCreate()) {
    // Don't allow creating a document without a type.
    validateNotEmpty("type", doc.type);
  } else if (isUpdate()) {
    // Don't allow changing the type of any document.
    validateReadOnly("type", doc.type, oldDoc.type);
  }

  function isCreate() {
    return ((oldDoc == null || oldDoc._deleted) && doc._deleted != true);
  }

  function isUpdate() {
    return (!isCreate(oldDoc) && !isDelete(doc));
  }

  function validateReadOnly(name, value, oldValue) {
    if (value != oldValue) {
      throw({forbidden: name + " is read-only."});
    }
  }
}
```

As shown above, you can define inner functions to encapsulate logic used throughout the sync function. This makes your code more readable and follows the DRY principle (Don't Repeat Yourself).

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the code snippet above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the updated sync function.

    > **Note:** It won't update the config file on your filesystem, make sure to copy/paste from the Admin UI to the config once you are happy with your changes.

3. Add two documents through the REST API. One with the `type` property and the second document without it. Notice that the user credentials (**user1/pass**) are passed in the URL.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_bulk_docs' \
          -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
          -d '{"docs": [{"type": "task-list", "name": "Groceries"}, {"names": "Today"}]}'

    [
      {"id":"e498cad0380e30a86ed5572140c94831","rev":"1-e4ac377fc9bd3345ddf5892b509c4d79"},
      {"error":"forbidden","reason":"type property missing","status":403}
    ]
    ```
    
    > **Note:** The curl executable for Windows can be found [on this page](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)

    The document without a type is rejected with an error message: "type property missing".

### Write Permissions

Once you know the type of a document, the next step is to check the write permissions.

The following code ensures the user creating the list document matches with the `owner` property. If not then it checks if the user is a moderator.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    /* Control Write Access */
    var owner = doc._deleted ? oldDoc.owner : doc.owner;
    try {
      // Users can create/update lists for themselves.
      requireUser(owner);
    } catch (e) {
      // Moderators can create/update lists for other users.
      requireRole("moderator");
    }
  }

  function getType() {
    return (isDelete() ? oldDoc.type : doc.type);
  }

  function isDelete() {
    return (doc._deleted == true);
  }
  ...
}
```

When a document is deleted the user properties are removed and the `_deleted: true` property is added as metadata. In this case, the sync function must retrieve the deletion revision type from oldDoc. In the code above, the `getType` inner function encapsulates this logic.

Similarly, the owner field is taken from oldDoc if doc is a deletion revision. The **requireUser** and **requireRole** functions are functionalities built in Sync Gateway.

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
1. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
2. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the updated sync function.
3. Add two documents through the REST API. The request is sent as a moderator user (**user1/pass**). One document is a list for user1 and another is a list for user2.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_bulk_docs' \
          -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
          -d '{"docs": [{"type": "task-list", "owner": "user1"}, {"type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}]}'
          
    [
      {"id":"49c9d5cbbc1cfa05d253f4847d02b8a0","rev":"1-477f7c4f36a31ce9e86a5f465b168b8a"},
      {"error":"forbidden","reason":"missing role","status":403}
    ]
    ```

  Both documents are successfully persisted because the user sending the request has the moderator role.

### Validating Changes

After write permissions, you must ensure the document has the expected schema. There are different types of validation such as checking for the presence of a field or enforcing read-only permission on parts of a document. The code below performs various schema validation operations.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    ...
    /* Validate */
    if (!isDelete()) {
        // Validate required fields.
        validateNotEmpty("name", doc.name);
        validateNotEmpty("owner", doc.owner);

        if (isCreate()) {
          // Validate that the _id is prefixed by owner.
          // validatePrefix("_id", doc._id, "owner", doc.owner + ".");
        } else {
          // Don’t allow task-list ownership to be changed.
          validateReadOnly("owner", doc.owner, oldDoc.owner);
        }
    }
    ...
  }

  function validateNotEmpty(key, value) {
    if (!value) {
      throw({forbidden: key + " is not provided."});
    }
  }

  function validateReadOnly(name, value, oldValue) {
    if (value != oldValue) {
      throw({forbidden: name + " is read-only."});
    }
  }
  ...
}
```

`validateNotEmpty` and `validateReadOnly` are inner functions to encapsulate common validation operations.

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the updated sync function.
4. Send documents with incorrect schemas to make sure the validation works as expected.

### Routing

Once you have determined that the schema is valid you can route the document to channels. A channel is a namespace for documents specifically designed for access control. The code below routes the document to its own list channel.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    ...
    /* Route */
    // Add doc to task-list's channel.
    channel("task-list." + doc._id);
    channel("moderators");
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Deploy To Server** button. It will restart Sync Gateway with the upated sync function.
4. 

Both documents are saved and mapped to the corresponding channels in the Admin UI. The video below shows you how to navigate through the different channels.

[//]: # "TODO: Link to video."
<video src="https://cl.ly/3i2w062z1w1F/movie2.mp4" controls="true"></video>

### Read Access

The last step in writing access control rules for a document type is to allow read access to channels. The following code grants the owner and users that are moderators access to the list's channel.

```javascript
function (doc, oldDoc) {
  ...
  if (getType() == "task-list") {
    ...
    /* Grant Read Access */
    // Grant task-list owner access to the task-list, its tasks, and its users.
    access(doc.owner, "task-list." + doc._id);
    access(doc.owner, "task-list." + doc._id + ".users");
    access("role:moderator", "task-list." + doc._id);
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

#### Try it out

1. Open the Sync menu on the Admin UI [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo/sync).
2. Copy the changes above in the Sync Function text area.
3. Click the **Live Preview Mode** button. This mode doesn't restart Sync Gateway but will use the updated Sync Function for testing purposes. Click the **random** button to pick a document at random and run it through the sync function again. It re-calculates the routing to channels and access grants. This time, the owner (user1) and moderator (user2) both access to the list's channel.

    ![](img/image38.png)

## Conclusion

Well done! You've completed this lesson on adding authentication, writing a sync function and adding database encryption. Feel free to share your feedback, findings or ask any questions on the forums.
