md-docs/ready/training/07-integration.md, before:

---
id: integration
title: Integration
permalink: ready/training/develop/integration/index.html
---

In this lesson you’ll learn how to integrate Couchbase Mobile with external systems using Sync Gateway. You’ll use the changes stream for real-time streaming access to data changes and the bulk APIs for bulk import/export operations.

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="ios" />

#### Requirements

- Xcode 8 (Swift 3)

#### Getting Started

Download the project below.

<block class="net" />

#### Requirements

- Visual Studio 2015+ (Windows) or Xamarin Studio 6+ (OS X)

#### Getting Started

- Clone this repo and open the `dotnet\Training.sln` project
- (optional) Update to the latest version of the Couchbase.Lite / Couchbase.Lite.Storage.SQLCipher nuget package, if not already added

<block class="ios" />

<div class="buttons-unit downloads">
  <a href="https://cl.ly/2A2D3q3R2d1g/xcode-project.zip" class="button" id="project">
    <img src="img/download-xcode.png">
  </a>
</div>

Unzip the file and install the dependencies using Cocoapods.

```bash
$ cd xcode-project
$ pod install
```

Open **Todo.xcodeproj** in Xcode. Then build & run the project.

<img src="img/image42.png" class="center-image" />

Throughout this lesson, you will navigate in different files of the Xcode project. We recommend to use the method navigator to scroll to a method.

<img src="https://cl.ly/0G263m3m1a0w/image44.gif" class="center-image" />

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="all" />

## Changes stream

### Connecting

The changes stream returns a sorted list of changes made to documents in the database. It's the primary API to get notified of changes as they are processed by Sync Gateway and persisted to Couchbase Server.

Documents written to Sync Gateway are assigned a sequence value at write time. This sequence is used to order the changes feed. You can query the changes feed using a simple HTTP GET request to `/{db}/_changes` as shown below.

```bash
$ curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -vX GET 'http://localhost:4985/todo/_changes?since=3' -d '{}'

{
  "results":[
    {"seq":3,"id":"-K56UC6KOhFz1CcReSIq7RA","changes":[{"rev":"2-2b105e01ea899c6a7875b50806f1377a"}]},
    {"seq":4,"id":"user1.CD59C6F0-D2FE-4C05-8712-52BDF86AA694","deleted":true,"changes":[{"rev":"2-3c169e667f727ab4b51e56f5878df7c7"}]},{"seq":5,"id":"user1.76FE447B-0A1A-4EE9-9501-7F7B36164B4B","changes":[{"rev":"1-5ad8375dc53dde5a2fd555b4b4a82184"}
  ]
}
```

The **since** parameter in the querystring is used to specify which sequence to start from. In this case the response contains changes starting at `seq: 3` because the `since=3` parameter was sent in the querystring.

Deleting a document creates a new revision with the `deleted: true` property and no user properties. This is required in order to propagate the deletion to other devices. In the example above the change with sequence 4 (`seq: 4`) is a deletion.

#### Try it out

1. Download Sync Gateway and start it with the configuration file in the root directory of the accompanying project.

    ```bash
    ~/Downloads/couchbase-sync-gateway/bin/sync_gateway sync-gateway-config.json
    ```

<block class="ios" />

2. Open **AppDelegate.swift** and set the following constants to `true`.

    ```swift
    let kLoginFlowEnabled = true
    let kSyncEnabled = true
    ```
    
<block class="net" />

2. Open **CoreApp.cs** and change the `CreateHint()` method as follows:

   ```c#
   var retVal = new CoreAppStartHint {
      LoginEnabled = true, // This line needs to be changed
      EncryptionEnabled = false,
      SyncEnabled = true, // This line needs to be changed
      UsePrebuiltDB = false,
      ConflictResolution = false,
      Username = "todo"
  };

  return retVal;
  ```

<block class="all" />

3. Run the application, login with the **user1/pass** credentials and add a new list. It should appear as a new document on the Admin UI of Sync Gateway on [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo).

4. To access the changes stream (also called the changes feed). Open a browser tab at [http://localhost:4985/todo/_changes](http://localhost:4985/todo/_changes).

    ![](img/image54.png)

### Subscribing to changes

In this section you will write a script to subscribe to changes continuously. This becomes particularly useful for integrating Couchbase Mobile with other systems.

To be notified of a change as it happens, an HTTP socket must remain open between the client and Sync Gateway. The `feed` querystring option is used in this case and there are 2 different feed types:

- **longpoll**: The response will contain all the changes since the specified sequence. If seq is the last sequence number (the most recent one) then the connection will remain open until a new document is processed by Sync Gateway and the change event is sent.
- **continuous**: In this case, Sync Gateway will hold the connection open forever.

To subscribe to the changes feed you can use any HTTP library to send the `GET /_changes` request with query options. In this lesson however you will use the generated libraries based on the Swagger specs. The code below sends a request to the changes stream every time a response has been received and processed. The `getChanges(seq)` method is called recursively passing the `last_seq` property received in the response as the `since` value in the subsequent request.

```javascript
// This code can be found in bot/app.js
new Swagger({
  url: 'http://developer.couchbase.com/mobile/swagger/sync-gateway-admin/spec.json',
  usePromise: true
})
  .then(function (res) {
    client = res;
    
    // Start getting changes at seq: 2
    getChanges(2);
    
    function getChanges(seq) {
      // Use the Swagger client to connect to the changes feed
      client.database.get_db_changes({db: 'todo', include_docs: true, since: seq, feed: 'longpoll'})
        .then(function (res) {
          var results = res.obj.results;
          console.log(results.length + ' change(s) received');
          processChanges(results);
          // Get changes since the last sequence
          getChanges(res.obj.last_seq);
        })
        .catch(function (err) {
          console.log(err);
        });
    }
    
    ...

  });
```

Notice that the `get_db_changes` method is used with `since: <seq>` and `feed: longpoll` to get a set of changes since a specified sequence. The `include_docs: true` option is used to include the document body in the response.

#### Try it out

1. Open a Terminal window in the **bot** directory, install the dependencies and start the bot.

    ```bash
    npm install
    node app.js
    ```

2. Make further changes in the application and notice that the number of changes are printed to the console.

    ![](https://cl.ly/1X0M0J2Q450U/image55.gif)

## Bulk operations

In this section you will learn how to persist an image as an attachment using the Admin REST API. You will extend the changes feed handling code from the previous section to attach the image to a **task** document only if the text value is "apple", "coffee" or "potatoes".

Similarly to the previous section, you will use the API methods available on the library provided by Swagger.

```javascript
// This code can be found in bot/app.js
new Swagger({
  url: 'http://developer.couchbase.com/mobile/swagger/sync-gateway-admin/spec.json',
  usePromise: true
})
  .then(function (res) {
    client = res;
    
    ...
    
    function processChanges(results) {
      for (var i = 0; i < results.length; i++) {
        var doc = results[i].doc;
        var img;
        if (!doc._deleted && doc.type == 'task' && !doc._attachments) {
          switch (doc.task.toLowerCase()) {
            case 'apple':
              img = fs.readFileSync('apple.png');
              break;
            case 'coffee':
              img = fs.readFileSync('coffee.png');
              break;
            case 'potatoes':
              img = fs.readFileSync('potatoes.png');
              break;
          }
          if (img) {
            var base64 = img.toString('base64');
            doc._attachments = {
              image: {
                content_type: 'image\/png',
                data: base64
              }
            };
            client.database.post_db_bulk_docs({db: 'todo', BulkDocsBody: {docs: [doc]}})
              .then(function (res) {
                getChanges(results[i].seq);
              })
              .catch(function (err) {
                console.log(err);
              });
          }
        }
      }
    }

  });
```

This code checks that the change is not a deletion and that the document type is "task". If the `doc.task` property is either "apple", "coffee" or "potatoes" then it reads the corresponding image as a Base64 string and sets it on the document's `_attachments` dictionary. Finally it persists the document with the attachment back to Sync Gateway using the `post_db_bulk_docs` method.

#### Try it out

1. Run the application and make sure it's replicating to Sync Gateway.
2. Start the bot.

    ```bash
    node app.js
    ```

3. Add a task called "Apple", "Coffee" or "Potatoes" and an image should appear after a few seconds. That's the attachment that was added to Sync Gateway by the bot and in turn replicated to Couchbase Lite.

    ![](https://cl.ly/060e3a0p3717/image56.gif)

## Conclusion

Well done! You've completed this lesson on integration by using the Stream API to subscribe to changes and the REST API to persist a document back to Sync Gateway. Feel free to share your feedback, findings or ask any questions on the forums.

Commit message:

Add link for curl executable on Windows (07)

md-docs/ready/training/07-integration.md, after:

---
id: integration
title: Integration
permalink: ready/training/develop/integration/index.html
---

In this lesson you’ll learn how to integrate Couchbase Mobile with external systems using Sync Gateway. You’ll use the changes stream for real-time streaming access to data changes and the bulk APIs for bulk import/export operations.

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="ios" />

#### Requirements

- Xcode 8 (Swift 3)

#### Getting Started

Download the project below.

<block class="net" />

#### Requirements

- Visual Studio 2015+ (Windows) or Xamarin Studio 6+ (OS X)

#### Getting Started

- Clone this repo and open the `dotnet\Training.sln` project
- (optional) Update to the latest version of the Couchbase.Lite / Couchbase.Lite.Storage.SQLCipher nuget package, if not already added

<block class="ios" />

<div class="buttons-unit downloads">
  <a href="https://cl.ly/2A2D3q3R2d1g/xcode-project.zip" class="button" id="project">
    <img src="img/download-xcode.png">
  </a>
</div>

Unzip the file and install the dependencies using Cocoapods.

```bash
$ cd xcode-project
$ pod install
```

Open **Todo.xcodeproj** in Xcode. Then build & run the project.

<img src="img/image42.png" class="center-image" />

Throughout this lesson, you will navigate in different files of the Xcode project. We recommend to use the method navigator to scroll to a method.

<img src="https://cl.ly/0G263m3m1a0w/image44.gif" class="center-image" />

[//]: # "COMMON ACROSS LESSONS"

<block class="all" />

## Changes stream

### Connecting

The changes stream returns a sorted list of changes made to documents in the database. It's the primary API to get notified of changes as they are processed by Sync Gateway and persisted to Couchbase Server.

Documents written to Sync Gateway are assigned a sequence value at write time. This sequence is used to order the changes feed. You can query the changes feed using a simple HTTP GET request to `/{db}/_changes` as shown below.

```bash
$ curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -vX GET 'http://localhost:4985/todo/_changes?since=3' -d '{}'

{
  "results":[
    {"seq":3,"id":"-K56UC6KOhFz1CcReSIq7RA","changes":[{"rev":"2-2b105e01ea899c6a7875b50806f1377a"}]},
    {"seq":4,"id":"user1.CD59C6F0-D2FE-4C05-8712-52BDF86AA694","deleted":true,"changes":[{"rev":"2-3c169e667f727ab4b51e56f5878df7c7"}]},{"seq":5,"id":"user1.76FE447B-0A1A-4EE9-9501-7F7B36164B4B","changes":[{"rev":"1-5ad8375dc53dde5a2fd555b4b4a82184"}
  ]
}
```

    > **Note:** The curl executable for Windows can be found [on this page](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)

The **since** parameter in the querystring is used to specify which sequence to start from. In this case the response contains changes starting at `seq: 3` because the `since=3` parameter was sent in the querystring.

Deleting a document creates a new revision with the `deleted: true` property and no user properties. This is required in order to propagate the deletion to other devices. In the example above the change with sequence 4 (`seq: 4`) is a deletion.

#### Try it out

1. Download Sync Gateway and start it with the configuration file in the root directory of the accompanying project.

    ```bash
    ~/Downloads/couchbase-sync-gateway/bin/sync_gateway sync-gateway-config.json
    ```

<block class="ios" />

2. Open **AppDelegate.swift** and set the following constants to `true`.

    ```swift
    let kLoginFlowEnabled = true
    let kSyncEnabled = true
    ```
    
<block class="net" />

2. Open **CoreApp.cs** and change the `CreateHint()` method as follows:

   ```c#
   var retVal = new CoreAppStartHint {
      LoginEnabled = true, // This line needs to be changed
      EncryptionEnabled = false,
      SyncEnabled = true, // This line needs to be changed
      UsePrebuiltDB = false,
      ConflictResolution = false,
      Username = "todo"
  };

  return retVal;
  ```

<block class="all" />

3. Run the application, login with the **user1/pass** credentials and add a new list. It should appear as a new document on the Admin UI of Sync Gateway on [http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo](http://localhost:4985/_admin/db/todo).

4. To access the changes stream (also called the changes feed). Open a browser tab at [http://localhost:4985/todo/_changes](http://localhost:4985/todo/_changes).

    ![](img/image54.png)

### Subscribing to changes

In this section you will write a script to subscribe to changes continuously. This becomes particularly useful for integrating Couchbase Mobile with other systems.

To be notified of a change as it happens, an HTTP socket must remain open between the client and Sync Gateway. The `feed` querystring option is used in this case and there are 2 different feed types:

- **longpoll**: The response will contain all the changes since the specified sequence. If seq is the last sequence number (the most recent one) then the connection will remain open until a new document is processed by Sync Gateway and the change event is sent.
- **continuous**: In this case, Sync Gateway will hold the connection open forever.

To subscribe to the changes feed you can use any HTTP library to send the `GET /_changes` request with query options. In this lesson however you will use the generated libraries based on the Swagger specs. The code below sends a request to the changes stream every time a response has been received and processed. The `getChanges(seq)` method is called recursively passing the `last_seq` property received in the response as the `since` value in the subsequent request.

```javascript
// This code can be found in bot/app.js
new Swagger({
  url: 'http://developer.couchbase.com/mobile/swagger/sync-gateway-admin/spec.json',
  usePromise: true
})
  .then(function (res) {
    client = res;
    
    // Start getting changes at seq: 2
    getChanges(2);
    
    function getChanges(seq) {
      // Use the Swagger client to connect to the changes feed
      client.database.get_db_changes({db: 'todo', include_docs: true, since: seq, feed: 'longpoll'})
        .then(function (res) {
          var results = res.obj.results;
          console.log(results.length + ' change(s) received');
          processChanges(results);
          // Get changes since the last sequence
          getChanges(res.obj.last_seq);
        })
        .catch(function (err) {
          console.log(err);
        });
    }
    
    ...

  });
```

Notice that the `get_db_changes` method is used with `since: <seq>` and `feed: longpoll` to get a set of changes since a specified sequence. The `include_docs: true` option is used to include the document body in the response.

#### Try it out

1. Open a Terminal window in the **bot** directory, install the dependencies and start the bot.

    ```bash
    npm install
    node app.js
    ```

2. Make further changes in the application and notice that the number of changes are printed to the console.

    ![](https://cl.ly/1X0M0J2Q450U/image55.gif)

## Bulk operations

In this section you will learn how to persist an image as an attachment using the Admin REST API. You will extend the changes feed handling code from the previous section to attach the image to a **task** document only if the text value is "apple", "coffee" or "potatoes".

Similarly to the previous section, you will use the API methods available on the library provided by Swagger.

```javascript
// This code can be found in bot/app.js
new Swagger({
  url: 'http://developer.couchbase.com/mobile/swagger/sync-gateway-admin/spec.json',
  usePromise: true
})
  .then(function (res) {
    client = res;
    
    ...
    
    function processChanges(results) {
      for (var i = 0; i < results.length; i++) {
        var doc = results[i].doc;
        var img;
        if (!doc._deleted && doc.type == 'task' && !doc._attachments) {
          switch (doc.task.toLowerCase()) {
            case 'apple':
              img = fs.readFileSync('apple.png');
              break;
            case 'coffee':
              img = fs.readFileSync('coffee.png');
              break;
            case 'potatoes':
              img = fs.readFileSync('potatoes.png');
              break;
          }
          if (img) {
            var base64 = img.toString('base64');
            doc._attachments = {
              image: {
                content_type: 'image\/png',
                data: base64
              }
            };
            client.database.post_db_bulk_docs({db: 'todo', BulkDocsBody: {docs: [doc]}})
              .then(function (res) {
                getChanges(results[i].seq);
              })
              .catch(function (err) {
                console.log(err);
              });
          }
        }
      }
    }

  });
```

This code checks that the change is not a deletion and that the document type is "task". If the `doc.task` property is either "apple", "coffee" or "potatoes" then it reads the corresponding image as a Base64 string and sets it on the document's `_attachments` dictionary. Finally it persists the document with the attachment back to Sync Gateway using the `post_db_bulk_docs` method.

#### Try it out

1. Run the application and make sure it's replicating to Sync Gateway.
2. Start the bot.

    ```bash
    node app.js
    ```

3. Add a task called "Apple", "Coffee" or "Potatoes" and an image should appear after a few seconds. That's the attachment that was added to Sync Gateway by the bot and in turn replicated to Couchbase Lite.

    ![](https://cl.ly/060e3a0p3717/image56.gif)

## Conclusion

Well done! You've completed this lesson on integration by using the Stream API to subscribe to changes and the REST API to persist a document back to Sync Gateway. Feel free to share your feedback, findings or ask any questions on the forums.
