md-docs/ready/training/08-functional-testing.md, before:

---
id: functional-testing
title: Functional Testing
permalink: ready/training/test/functional-testing/index.html
---

In this lesson you'll learn how to perform functional tests on your Couchbase Mobile application. You'll test the Sync Function to make sure it conforms to the business rules of the application.

<block class="ios" />

<div class="buttons-unit downloads">
  <a href="https://cl.ly/2A2D3q3R2d1g/xcode-project.zip" class="button" id="project">
    <img src="img/download-xcode.png">
  </a>
</div>

<block class="all" />

## Introduction

In this section you will learn how to categorize the different types of functional tests. The Sync Function is the application's core security component so it's important to test it.

When a document is processed in the Sync Function, there are usually 4 steps to determine if the operation will succeed.

![](img/image15.png)

In the project folder you will find the sync function. The table below translates each line from the Sync Function into what it means from an access control standpoint.

### Try it out

1. Download Sync Gateway
2. Start it from the command with the configuration file that was provided.

    ```bash
    ~/path/to/sync_gateway sync-gateway-config.json
    ```

## Testing Validation Rules

The first test you will write is to validate that the document meets the schema requirements.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|`taskList.id`, `taskList.owner` and `task` are required|task|Validation|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
...
/* Validate */
if (!oldDoc) {
    // Validate required fields.
    validateNotEmpty("taskList.id", doc.taskList.id);
    validateNotEmpty("taskList.owner", doc.taskList.owner);
    validateNotEmpty("task", doc.task);
}
...
```

### Try it out

1. Save a new task document with an invalid schema.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://localhost:4985/todo/' \
        -d '{"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user2"}}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"taskList.id is not provided."}

    curl -H 'Content-type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://localhost:4985/todo/' \
        -d '{"type": "task", "taskList": {"id": 123}}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"task.owner is not provided."}

    curl -H 'Content-type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://localhost:4985/todo/' \
        -d '{"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user2", "id": 123}}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"task is not provided."}
    ```

    The operation is rejected in all 3 requests with a **403 Forbidden** error because the schema is not valid. The test has passed.

## Testing Write Permissions

### User write permissions

In this section you will test that normal users can't create a list for another user.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|Only owner can create lists for themselves|task-list|Write|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
...
/* Control Write Access */
if (!oldDoc) {
    // Users can create/update lists for themselves.
    requireUser(doc.owner);
}
...
```

#### Try it out

1. Save a new list for another user.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -d '{"name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"missing role"}
    ```

    The operation is rejected with a **403 Forbidden** error because user1 is attempting to create a list for user2. The test has passed.

### Moderator write permissions

In this section you will test that moderators have the right to create lists for other users.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|Moderators can create lists for other users|task-list|Write|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
try {
    // Users can create/update lists for themselves.
    requireUser(doc.owner);
} catch (e) {
    // Moderators can create/update lists for other users.
    requireRole("moderator");
}
```

#### Try it out

1. Grant user1 with the **moderator** role.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X PUT 'http://localhost:4985/todo/_user/user1' \
        -d '{"admin_roles": ["moderator"]}'
    ```

2. Create a new list for user2.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -d '{"_id": "user2.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}'

    200 OK
    ```

    The operation is accepted. The test has passed.

## Testing Update Permissions

In this section you will test that the owner property of a list cannot be changed.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|Owner field is immutable|task-list|Validation|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
...
/* Validate */
if (!doc._deleted) {
    // Validate required fields.
    validateNotEmpty("name", doc.name);
    validateNotEmpty("owner", doc.owner);
    // Validate that the _id is prefixed with the owner.
    validatePrefix("_id", doc._id, "owner");
    // Don't allow task-list ownership to be changed.
    validateReadOnly("owner", doc, oldDoc);
}
...
```

### Try it out

1. Create a list for user1.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -d '{"_id": "user1.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user1"}'

    {"id":"user1.123","ok":true,"rev":"1-7008921932d980b285d18c173e0dff1f"}
    ```

2. Change the owner property to user2.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X PUT 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/user1.123?rev=1-7008921932d980b285d18c173e0dff1f' \
        -d '{"_id": "user1.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"owner is immutable."}
    ```

    The operation is rejected with a **403 Forbidden** error. The test has passed.

## Testing Routing

In this section you will test the action of sharing a list.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|The doc.username user is granted read access to the "task-list.{doc.taskList.id}" channel|task-list:user|Routing|

When subscribing to the changes feed as a particular user, only the documents that the user has access to are returned in the response. Thus, you can subscribe to the changes feed to test that the list is successfully shared with the user.

### Try it out

1. Create a new list with 3 tasks.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_bulk_docs' \
        -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -d '{"docs": [{"_id": "user1.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user1"}, {"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user1", "id": "user1.123"}, "task": "potatoes"}, {"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user1", "id": "user1.123"}, "task": "tomatoes"}, {"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user1", "id": "user1.123"}, "task": "apples"}]}'

    [{"id":"user1.123","rev":"1-7008921932d980b285d18c173e0dff1f"},{"id":"766233c993c6ec0e74d5e2c679d53155","rev":"1-67572fec1d27bd246ce45c691648586d"},{"id":"061f8c1e7b0d8a02571559ebf062f2ea","rev":"1-389c6e91a20adae28acd1e5f76d732b8"},{"id":"94305dc7a5ce76a75141c9836d3924a7","rev":"1-f7f5519d3f2c0a5bdf3a122c8bf93042"}]
    ```

2. Query the changes feed as user2.

    ```bash
    curl -vX GET 'http://user2:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_changes'
    ```

    Notice that the response doesn't contain the list that was added previously because user2 doesn't have access to this list's channel.

    > **Tip:** Tail the Sync Gateway logs.

3. Create a new list user document to share the list with user2.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -d '{"_id": "user1.123.user2", "type": "task-list.user", "taskList": {"id": "user1.123", "owner": "user1"}, "username": "user2"}'
    ```

    The sole purpose of this document is to grant user2 access to the "task-list.user1.123" channel.

4. Query the changes feed as user2 again and notice that now the list and task documents are in the response. User2 has now access to the shared list. The test has passed.

## Conclusion

Well done! You've completed this lesson on functional testing. In the next lesson you'll learn how to run performance tests. Feel free to share your feedback, findings or ask any questions on the forums.

Commit message:

Add link for curl executable for Windows (08)

md-docs/ready/training/08-functional-testing.md, after:

---
id: functional-testing
title: Functional Testing
permalink: ready/training/test/functional-testing/index.html
---

In this lesson you'll learn how to perform functional tests on your Couchbase Mobile application. You'll test the Sync Function to make sure it conforms to the business rules of the application.

<block class="ios" />

<div class="buttons-unit downloads">
  <a href="https://cl.ly/2A2D3q3R2d1g/xcode-project.zip" class="button" id="project">
    <img src="img/download-xcode.png">
  </a>
</div>

<block class="all" />

## Introduction

In this section you will learn how to categorize the different types of functional tests. The Sync Function is the application's core security component so it's important to test it.

When a document is processed in the Sync Function, there are usually 4 steps to determine if the operation will succeed.

![](img/image15.png)

In the project folder you will find the sync function. The table below translates each line from the Sync Function into what it means from an access control standpoint.

### Try it out

1. Download Sync Gateway
2. Start it from the command with the configuration file that was provided.

    ```bash
    ~/path/to/sync_gateway sync-gateway-config.json
    ```

## Testing Validation Rules

The first test you will write is to validate that the document meets the schema requirements.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|`taskList.id`, `taskList.owner` and `task` are required|task|Validation|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
...
/* Validate */
if (!oldDoc) {
    // Validate required fields.
    validateNotEmpty("taskList.id", doc.taskList.id);
    validateNotEmpty("taskList.owner", doc.taskList.owner);
    validateNotEmpty("task", doc.task);
}
...
```

### Try it out

1. Save a new task document with an invalid schema.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://localhost:4985/todo/' \
        -d '{"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user2"}}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"taskList.id is not provided."}

    curl -H 'Content-type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://localhost:4985/todo/' \
        -d '{"type": "task", "taskList": {"id": 123}}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"task.owner is not provided."}

    curl -H 'Content-type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://localhost:4985/todo/' \
        -d '{"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user2", "id": 123}}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"task is not provided."}
    ```
    
    > **Note:** The curl executable for Windows can be found [on this page](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)

    The operation is rejected in all 3 requests with a **403 Forbidden** error because the schema is not valid. The test has passed.

## Testing Write Permissions

### User write permissions

In this section you will test that normal users can't create a list for another user.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|Only owner can create lists for themselves|task-list|Write|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
...
/* Control Write Access */
if (!oldDoc) {
    // Users can create/update lists for themselves.
    requireUser(doc.owner);
}
...
```

#### Try it out

1. Save a new list for another user.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -d '{"name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"missing role"}
    ```

    The operation is rejected with a **403 Forbidden** error because user1 is attempting to create a list for user2. The test has passed.

### Moderator write permissions

In this section you will test that moderators have the right to create lists for other users.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|Moderators can create lists for other users|task-list|Write|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
try {
    // Users can create/update lists for themselves.
    requireUser(doc.owner);
} catch (e) {
    // Moderators can create/update lists for other users.
    requireRole("moderator");
}
```

#### Try it out

1. Grant user1 with the **moderator** role.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X PUT 'http://localhost:4985/todo/_user/user1' \
        -d '{"admin_roles": ["moderator"]}'
    ```

2. Create a new list for user2.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -d '{"_id": "user2.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}'

    200 OK
    ```

    The operation is accepted. The test has passed.

## Testing Update Permissions

In this section you will test that the owner property of a list cannot be changed.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|Owner field is immutable|task-list|Validation|

The section of the Sync Function that implements this rule is the following.

```javascript
...
/* Validate */
if (!doc._deleted) {
    // Validate required fields.
    validateNotEmpty("name", doc.name);
    validateNotEmpty("owner", doc.owner);
    // Validate that the _id is prefixed with the owner.
    validatePrefix("_id", doc._id, "owner");
    // Don't allow task-list ownership to be changed.
    validateReadOnly("owner", doc, oldDoc);
}
...
```

### Try it out

1. Create a list for user1.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -d '{"_id": "user1.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user1"}'

    {"id":"user1.123","ok":true,"rev":"1-7008921932d980b285d18c173e0dff1f"}
    ```

2. Change the owner property to user2.

    ```bash
    curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -X PUT 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/user1.123?rev=1-7008921932d980b285d18c173e0dff1f' \
        -d '{"_id": "user1.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user2"}'

    {"error":"Forbidden","reason":"owner is immutable."}
    ```

    The operation is rejected with a **403 Forbidden** error. The test has passed.

## Testing Routing

In this section you will test the action of sharing a list.

|Scenario|Document Type|Type of Test|
|:-------|:------------|:---------------|
|The doc.username user is granted read access to the "task-list.{doc.taskList.id}" channel|task-list:user|Routing|

When subscribing to the changes feed as a particular user, only the documents that the user has access to are returned in the response. Thus, you can subscribe to the changes feed to test that the list is successfully shared with the user.

### Try it out

1. Create a new list with 3 tasks.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_bulk_docs' \
        -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -d '{"docs": [{"_id": "user1.123", "name": "Groceries", "type": "task-list", "owner": "user1"}, {"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user1", "id": "user1.123"}, "task": "potatoes"}, {"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user1", "id": "user1.123"}, "task": "tomatoes"}, {"type": "task", "taskList": {"owner": "user1", "id": "user1.123"}, "task": "apples"}]}'

    [{"id":"user1.123","rev":"1-7008921932d980b285d18c173e0dff1f"},{"id":"766233c993c6ec0e74d5e2c679d53155","rev":"1-67572fec1d27bd246ce45c691648586d"},{"id":"061f8c1e7b0d8a02571559ebf062f2ea","rev":"1-389c6e91a20adae28acd1e5f76d732b8"},{"id":"94305dc7a5ce76a75141c9836d3924a7","rev":"1-f7f5519d3f2c0a5bdf3a122c8bf93042"}]
    ```

2. Query the changes feed as user2.

    ```bash
    curl -vX GET 'http://user2:pass@localhost:4984/todo/_changes'
    ```

    Notice that the response doesn't contain the list that was added previously because user2 doesn't have access to this list's channel.

    > **Tip:** Tail the Sync Gateway logs.

3. Create a new list user document to share the list with user2.

    ```bash
    curl -vX POST 'http://user1:pass@localhost:4984/todo/' \
        -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        -d '{"_id": "user1.123.user2", "type": "task-list.user", "taskList": {"id": "user1.123", "owner": "user1"}, "username": "user2"}'
    ```

    The sole purpose of this document is to grant user2 access to the "task-list.user1.123" channel.

4. Query the changes feed as user2 again and notice that now the list and task documents are in the response. User2 has now access to the shared list. The test has passed.

## Conclusion

Well done! You've completed this lesson on functional testing. In the next lesson you'll learn how to run performance tests. Feel free to share your feedback, findings or ask any questions on the forums.
