md-docs/_15/guides/sync-gateway/convergence.md, before:

---
title: What's New
permalink: whatsnew.html
---

{% include landing.html %}

> **Note:** The 1.5 release is a Sync Gateway only release. The latest release of Couchbase Lite remains 1.4.1.

With Sync Gateway 1.5, you can seamlessly extend an existing Couchbase Server deployment to connect with remote edge devices that are occasionally disconnected or connected.

In previous releases, you either had to ensure all writes happened through Sync Gateway, or had to set up bucket shadowing to ensure that the security and replication metadata needed by mobile applications was preserved.

In this release, the metadata created by the Sync Gateway is abstracted from applications reading and writing data directly to Couchbase Server. Mobile, web and desktop applications can therefore write to the same bucket in a Couchbase cluster.

### How to enable it

This new feature was made opt-in primarily out of consideration for existing customers upgrading from Sync Gateway 1.4. It ensures that their existing configs will continue to work as-is, and supports upgrade without bringing down the entire Sync Gateway cluster. The steps below walk through how to enable this new feature.

1. [Download Couchbase Server 5.0](https://www.couchbase.com/downloads).
2. [Download Sync Gateway 1.5](https://www.couchbase.com/downloads?family=Mobile&product=Couchbase%20Sync%20Gateway&edition=Enterprise%20Edition 
).
3. Create a new bucket in the Couchbase Server Admin Console.
4. With Role Based Access Control (RBAC) newly introduced in Couchbase Server 5.0, you'll need to create a new user with authorized access to the bucket. Choose the **Security > Add User** option in the Couchbase Server Admin and select the **Bucket Full Access** and **Read Only Admin** roles.
5. Start Sync Gateway with the following configuration file.

	```json
	{
		"databases": {
			"db": {
				"bucket": "my-bucket",
				"username": "my-user",
				"password": "my-password",
				"server": "http://localhost:8091",
				"enable_shared_bucket_access": true,
				"import_docs": "continuous"
			}
		}
	}
	```
	
	There are two properties to keep in mind. The `enable_shared_bucket_access` property is used to disable the default behaviour. And the `import_docs` property to specify that this Sync Gateway node should perform import processing of incoming documents. Note that in a clustered environment, only 1 node should use the `import_docs` property.

6. On start-up, Sync Gateway will generate the mobile-specific metadata for all the pre-existing documents in the Couchbase Server bucket. From then on, documents can be inserted on the Server directly (SDKs) or through the Sync Gateway REST API. The mobile metadata is no longer kept in the document, but in a system extended attribute in Couchbase Server.

The reference to the configuration API changes can be found below.

- [$dbname.enable\_shared\_bucket\_access](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-enable_shared_bucket_access) to enable convergence for a given database.
- [$dbname.import\_docs](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-import_docs) to give a particular Sync Gateway node the role of importing the documents.
- [$dbname.import\_filter](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-import_filter) to select which document(s) to make aware to mobile clients.

When this feature is enabled, the REST API will include the following changes.

- Sync Gateway purging ([/{db}/_purge](references/sync-gateway/admin-rest-api/index.html?v=1.5#/document/post__db___purge)) removes the document and its associated extended attributes.
- Sync Gateway document expiry (PUT [/{db}/{docid}](references/sync-gateway/admin-rest-api/index.html?v=1.5#/document/put__db___doc_)) will tombstone the active revision.

### Tombstones

When this feature is enabled, mobile tombstones are not retained indefinitely. They will be purged based on the server's metadata purge interval. To ensure tombstones are replicated to clients, you should set the server's metadata purge interval based on your expected replication frequency (see the [$dbname.enable\_shared\_bucket\_access](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-enable_shared_bucket_access) reference).

### Upgrading

This section is an overview of the different options to upgrade a running cluster to the latest version of Sync Gateway and Couchbase Server. For a complete list of instructions, we recommend to follow the [upgrade section](http://docs.couchbase.com/tutorials/travel-sample/deploy/centos#/0/4/0) in the travel sample tutorial. You will learn how to perform a rolling upgrade and enable the shared bucket access introduced in Sync Gateway 1.5 in order to use N1QL, Mobile and Server SDKs on the same bucket.

In each of the scenarios described below, the upgrade process will trigger views in Couchbase Server to be re-indexed. During the re-indexing, operations that are dependent on those views will not be available. The main operations relying on views to be indexed are:

- A user requests data that doesn't reside in the [channel cache](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-cache-channel_cache_max_length).
- A new channel or role is granted to a user in the [Sync Function](guides/sync-gateway/sync-function-api-guide/index.html).

The unavailability of those operations may result in some requests not being process. The duration of the downtime will depend on the data set and frequency of replications with mobile clients.

#### From 1.4 to 1.5 (xattrs disabled)

- A rolling upgrade is supported: modify your load balancer's config to stop any HTTP traffic going to the node that will be upgraded, perform the upgrade on the given node and rebalance the traffic across all nodes. Repeat this operation for each node that needs to be upgraded.
     
#### From 1.5 (xattrs disabled) to 1.5 (xattrs enabled)

- A rolling upgrade is supported: modify your load balancer's config to stop any HTTP traffic going to the node that will be upgraded, perform the upgrade on the given node and rebalance the traffic across all nodes. Repeat this operation for each node that needs to be upgraded.
- The mobile metadata for existing documents is automatically migrated.
- The first node to be upgraded should have the `import_docs=continuous` property enabled.
     
#### From 1.4 to 1.5 (xattrs enabled)

- This upgrade, if done directly, will result in application downtime because all the nodes must be taken offline during the upgrade.
- The first node to be restarted should have the `import_docs=continuous` property enabled.

That being said, it is possible to avoid this downtime by running the 2 upgrade paths mentioned above (first, an upgrade from 1.4 to 1.5, and second, an upgrade from 1.5 to 1.5 with xattrs enabled).

> **Note:** Enabling convergence on your existing deployment (i.e XATTRs) is **not** reversible. It is recommended to test the upgrade on a staging environment before upgrading the production environment.

### Additional Features

#### SSL and Multi-URL support

In Sync Gateway 1.5 you have the ability to define multiple server URLs in the Sync Gateway configuration, and full support for SSL between Sync Gateway and Couchbase Server.

- Sync Gateway Reference ([$dbname.server](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-server))
- Sync Gateway Accelerator Reference ([$dbname.server](guides/sync-gateway/accelerator.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-server), [cluster_config.server](guides/sync-gateway/accelerator.html#1.5/cluster_config-server))

#### Revs Limit lower limit

The [databases.foo\_db.revs\_limit](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-revs_limit) property now has a minimal value. See the API reference for more detail.

#### Rev Tree endpoint

The [/{db}/\_revtree/{doc}](references/sync-gateway/admin-rest-api/index.html?v=1.5#/document/get__db___revtree__doc_) endpoint returns the revision tree in dot syntax for the specified document. This endpoint is not officially supported and should only be used for troubleshooting and debugging purposes.

### Sample App

The following tutorial demonstrates the extended attributes support introduced in Sync Gateway 1.5.

<div class="dp">
	<div class="tiles">
		<div class="column size-1of2">
			<div class="box">
				<div class="container">
					<a href="http://docs.couchbase.com/tutorials/travel-sample/">
						<p style="text-align: center;">Travel Sample Mobile</p>
					</a>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
	</div>
</div>
<br/>
<br/>

### Migrating from Bucket Shadowing

As of Sync Gateway 1.5, the Bucket Shadowing feature is deprecated and no longer supported. The following steps outline a recommended method for migrating from Bucket Shadowing to the latest version with interoperability between Couchbase Server SDKs and Couchbase Mobile.

1. Follow the recommendations in the [Couchbase Server documentation](https://developer.couchbase.com/documentation/server/current/install/upgrade-online.html) to upgrade all instances to 5.0.
2. Update Couchbase Server SDK applications to read/write documents to the mobile bucket.
3. Make sure that all documents are present in the mobile bucket, the Sync Function may have rejected some documents based on the access control rules for example. If you are not using a Sync Function you can ignore this verification step.
4. Delete the shadow bucket from Couchbase Server.
5. Perform an upgrade of Sync Gateway instances as [detailed above](whatsnew.html#upgrading). This upgrade will incur some application downtime.
6. Monitor the Sync Gateway logs upon start-up.
7. Replications with mobile clients (i.e Couchbase Lite) should now resume.

Commit message:

clarify convergence is using CBS's 5.0 XATTR feature (#832)

md-docs/_15/guides/sync-gateway/convergence.md, after:

---
title: What's New
permalink: whatsnew.html
---

{% include landing.html %}

> **Note:** The 1.5 release is a Sync Gateway only release. The latest release of Couchbase Lite remains 1.4.1.

With Sync Gateway 1.5, you can seamlessly extend an existing Couchbase Server deployment to connect with remote edge devices that are occasionally disconnected or connected.

In previous releases, you either had to ensure all writes happened through Sync Gateway, or had to set up bucket shadowing to ensure that the security and replication metadata needed by mobile applications was preserved.

In this release, the metadata created by the Sync Gateway is abstracted from applications reading and writing data directly to Couchbase Server. Sync Gateway 1.5 utilizes a new feature of Couchbase Server 5.0 called XATTRs (x-attributes) to store that metadata into an external document fragment. Mobile, web and desktop applications can therefore write to the same bucket in a Couchbase cluster.

### How to enable it

This new feature was made opt-in primarily out of consideration for existing customers upgrading from Sync Gateway 1.4. It ensures that their existing configs will continue to work as-is, and supports upgrade without bringing down the entire Sync Gateway cluster. The steps below walk through how to enable this new feature.

1. [Download Couchbase Server 5.0](https://www.couchbase.com/downloads).
2. [Download Sync Gateway 1.5](https://www.couchbase.com/downloads?family=Mobile&product=Couchbase%20Sync%20Gateway&edition=Enterprise%20Edition 
).
3. Create a new bucket in the Couchbase Server Admin Console.
4. With Role Based Access Control (RBAC) newly introduced in Couchbase Server 5.0, you'll need to create a new user with authorized access to the bucket. Choose the **Security > Add User** option in the Couchbase Server Admin and select the **Bucket Full Access** and **Read Only Admin** roles.
5. Start Sync Gateway with the following configuration file.

	```json
	{
		"databases": {
			"db": {
				"bucket": "my-bucket",
				"username": "my-user",
				"password": "my-password",
				"server": "http://localhost:8091",
				"enable_shared_bucket_access": true,
				"import_docs": "continuous"
			}
		}
	}
	```
	
	There are two properties to keep in mind. The `enable_shared_bucket_access` property is used to disable the default behaviour. And the `import_docs` property to specify that this Sync Gateway node should perform import processing of incoming documents. Note that in a clustered environment, only 1 node should use the `import_docs` property.

6. On start-up, Sync Gateway will generate the mobile-specific metadata for all the pre-existing documents in the Couchbase Server bucket. From then on, documents can be inserted on the Server directly (SDKs) or through the Sync Gateway REST API. The mobile metadata is no longer kept in the document, but in a system extended attribute in Couchbase Server.

The reference to the configuration API changes can be found below.

- [$dbname.enable\_shared\_bucket\_access](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-enable_shared_bucket_access) to enable convergence for a given database.
- [$dbname.import\_docs](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-import_docs) to give a particular Sync Gateway node the role of importing the documents.
- [$dbname.import\_filter](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-import_filter) to select which document(s) to make aware to mobile clients.

When this feature is enabled, the REST API will include the following changes.

- Sync Gateway purging ([/{db}/_purge](references/sync-gateway/admin-rest-api/index.html?v=1.5#/document/post__db___purge)) removes the document and its associated extended attributes.
- Sync Gateway document expiry (PUT [/{db}/{docid}](references/sync-gateway/admin-rest-api/index.html?v=1.5#/document/put__db___doc_)) will tombstone the active revision.

### Tombstones

When this feature is enabled, mobile tombstones are not retained indefinitely. They will be purged based on the server's metadata purge interval. To ensure tombstones are replicated to clients, you should set the server's metadata purge interval based on your expected replication frequency (see the [$dbname.enable\_shared\_bucket\_access](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-enable_shared_bucket_access) reference).

### Upgrading

This section is an overview of the different options to upgrade a running cluster to the latest version of Sync Gateway and Couchbase Server. For a complete list of instructions, we recommend to follow the [upgrade section](http://docs.couchbase.com/tutorials/travel-sample/deploy/centos#/0/4/0) in the travel sample tutorial. You will learn how to perform a rolling upgrade and enable the shared bucket access introduced in Sync Gateway 1.5 in order to use N1QL, Mobile and Server SDKs on the same bucket.

In each of the scenarios described below, the upgrade process will trigger views in Couchbase Server to be re-indexed. During the re-indexing, operations that are dependent on those views will not be available. The main operations relying on views to be indexed are:

- A user requests data that doesn't reside in the [channel cache](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-cache-channel_cache_max_length).
- A new channel or role is granted to a user in the [Sync Function](guides/sync-gateway/sync-function-api-guide/index.html).

The unavailability of those operations may result in some requests not being process. The duration of the downtime will depend on the data set and frequency of replications with mobile clients.

#### From 1.4 to 1.5 (xattrs disabled)

- A rolling upgrade is supported: modify your load balancer's config to stop any HTTP traffic going to the node that will be upgraded, perform the upgrade on the given node and rebalance the traffic across all nodes. Repeat this operation for each node that needs to be upgraded.
     
#### From 1.5 (xattrs disabled) to 1.5 (xattrs enabled)

- A rolling upgrade is supported: modify your load balancer's config to stop any HTTP traffic going to the node that will be upgraded, perform the upgrade on the given node and rebalance the traffic across all nodes. Repeat this operation for each node that needs to be upgraded.
- The mobile metadata for existing documents is automatically migrated.
- The first node to be upgraded should have the `import_docs=continuous` property enabled.
     
#### From 1.4 to 1.5 (xattrs enabled)

- This upgrade, if done directly, will result in application downtime because all the nodes must be taken offline during the upgrade.
- The first node to be restarted should have the `import_docs=continuous` property enabled.

That being said, it is possible to avoid this downtime by running the 2 upgrade paths mentioned above (first, an upgrade from 1.4 to 1.5, and second, an upgrade from 1.5 to 1.5 with xattrs enabled).

> **Note:** Enabling convergence on your existing deployment (i.e XATTRs) is **not** reversible. It is recommended to test the upgrade on a staging environment before upgrading the production environment.

### Additional Features

#### SSL and Multi-URL support

In Sync Gateway 1.5 you have the ability to define multiple server URLs in the Sync Gateway configuration, and full support for SSL between Sync Gateway and Couchbase Server.

- Sync Gateway Reference ([$dbname.server](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-server))
- Sync Gateway Accelerator Reference ([$dbname.server](guides/sync-gateway/accelerator.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-server), [cluster_config.server](guides/sync-gateway/accelerator.html#1.5/cluster_config-server))

#### Revs Limit lower limit

The [databases.foo\_db.revs\_limit](guides/sync-gateway/config-properties/index.html#1.5/databases-foo_db-revs_limit) property now has a minimal value. See the API reference for more detail.

#### Rev Tree endpoint

The [/{db}/\_revtree/{doc}](references/sync-gateway/admin-rest-api/index.html?v=1.5#/document/get__db___revtree__doc_) endpoint returns the revision tree in dot syntax for the specified document. This endpoint is not officially supported and should only be used for troubleshooting and debugging purposes.

### Sample App

The following tutorial demonstrates the extended attributes support introduced in Sync Gateway 1.5.

<div class="dp">
	<div class="tiles">
		<div class="column size-1of2">
			<div class="box">
				<div class="container">
					<a href="http://docs.couchbase.com/tutorials/travel-sample/">
						<p style="text-align: center;">Travel Sample Mobile</p>
					</a>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
	</div>
</div>
<br/>
<br/>

### Migrating from Bucket Shadowing

As of Sync Gateway 1.5, the Bucket Shadowing feature is deprecated and no longer supported. The following steps outline a recommended method for migrating from Bucket Shadowing to the latest version with interoperability between Couchbase Server SDKs and Couchbase Mobile.

1. Follow the recommendations in the [Couchbase Server documentation](https://developer.couchbase.com/documentation/server/current/install/upgrade-online.html) to upgrade all instances to 5.0.
2. Update Couchbase Server SDK applications to read/write documents to the mobile bucket.
3. Make sure that all documents are present in the mobile bucket, the Sync Function may have rejected some documents based on the access control rules for example. If you are not using a Sync Function you can ignore this verification step.
4. Delete the shadow bucket from Couchbase Server.
5. Perform an upgrade of Sync Gateway instances as [detailed above](whatsnew.html#upgrading). This upgrade will incur some application downtime.
6. Monitor the Sync Gateway logs upon start-up.
7. Replications with mobile clients (i.e Couchbase Lite) should now resume.
